good evening fiona good evening panel
was a polishing decision regarding the
emptying of hospital beds
with the patients not being tested and
the outrageous consequences on early
citizens of elderly citizens
a planned arrangement and if so this is
not highlight
the lack of value and respect that we
place in the elderly
so was it a planned arrangement allowing
people back into care homes
without being tested and does it
highlight
the lack of value and respect yes alex
alex massey
um well the the care homes
situation i think is one of those areas
where governments uh
in all parts of the united kingdom faced
a terrible
uh set of choices you know that in
hindsight as nicolas sturgeon said
this week they would probably make some
decisions differently
you know at the time when people were
released from
hospital into care homes it was because
they feared
um that the nhs and the hospitals were
going to be
overwhelmed with covert cases and so you
know what
we do with people who are you know
delayed discharge bed blocking whatever
uh you know well get them out um uh
almost regardless of their circumstance
and that now because the sort of tsunami
of cobid cases didn't quite materialize
that now looks to be a terrible mistake
and obviously with hindsight
um it was a mistake but at the time it
was made i
i think it's reasonable for politicians
to
to say well but this was the choice that
we had available to us
but you can only do that i think you can
only get the public to trust you
if you communicate with canada if you
allow that mistakes will be made in a in
a
uh you know fiercely complicated and
unprecedented set of situations
but you can't just allow the mistakes
that will be made you have to actually
sort of admit to them and take ownership
of them as well
if you treat if we treat people like
adults there is a chance that they will
understand the position you're coming
from but you can't just sort of deny
that any mistakes took place
um and it seems to me to be
infantilizing
the government's uh of government
ministers wherever they happen to be to
try and pretend
that that could be the case um you know
people understand
that this is a really really difficult
situation to manage and it's why even
though patients may be beginning to wear
thin
i think there is still a residual degree
of goodwill for government
if government can can be shown to be
responsive
to this situation can show that it
is accepting and taking ownership of
mistakes and the care home situation
is clearly one of them you can't you
can't go around tackling all about how
you've
you know thrown a protective ring around
care homes at the same time as
you know thousands and thousands of
people are dying in care homes um
uh and the final point of the question
there um you know it is
clear i think that for a long long time
care homes have been a sort of
uh uh overlooked too often part of the
whole health and social care network
and that sometimes perhaps seen
as a convenient place to depart people
whose presence elsewhere might be
uh deemed undesirable or uh complicated
let's say from elaine in the audience
you've had your hand up for a short
while there
hi fiona um i agree with alex there i
think
at the start of this pandemic it was a
tsunami and no one really knew what they
were doing
and i think the choice when we saw those
horrific
images from the italian hospitals of um
patients lying
in corridors couldn't catch a breath i
think
the right decision was made at the time
to make sure our hospitals were clear
that we wouldn't have those images in
the front of our newspapers
and i think nephilim sturgeon has looked
back like alex said there
and thought you know in hindsight it was
a great thing and
she probably would have did things
differently i think the choice at the
time with having that tsunami of
patience
you know with covert versus letting
elderly patients go into a care home we
probably thought that was going to be a
safer place for them at the time
and was probably it was a
a lose-lose choice now that we look back
but at the time
and to try and get away from those
images of what we were seeing all over
the place with
people not getting a hospital bed and we
didn't it didn't come to that
which is a good thing and so i i think
as it's a lose-lose it's an unfortunate
rina you wanted to come back in you
asked a question yes thanks very much
and i think in terms of the planning you
know we have known about this since
end of september at the beginning of
january i know it's not a long time
but what has been clear from the very
start the most
vulnerable and the communities as
elderly
and we let people leave hospitals
without being tested
and put them into care homes and we put
them back into their own homes
be cared for by home care workers or by
support agencies or by
family and nobody was tested and
and so i know there was tough decisions
and i'm just talking about the scottish
government i mean generally right across
the uk
you know and i know we were flooded with
pictures of italy you know
but maybe if the cameras were in and out
the care homes we would be flooded with
as many pictures
of people dying in care homes
horrendously
i just think it's you know it's same
there's no winners in this and
i know it's been difficult and i know
that you know the whole thing's new
is um so i and i i
i just think they're the most vulnerable
and they are always
i feel um the first to be forgotten
you know we we clapped and we applaud
captain tom um and many and his
generation
and have just been left to die in care
homes and i just think it's outrageous
and i think just the other thing
if you wanted to say as i've listened
tonight and every time the conservative
member speaks all are here as well you
know we can't compare ourselves to other
countries
let's put the dominant gravity to bed
let's not talk about anything that's
showing us
up to be you know the um
unorganized um or you know party yeah
well helen i'll give you a chance to
respond to that in a minute but john
just coming in terms of thank you reena
for that i'm not trying to to cut you
off there
in terms of what uh reena saying um says
what alex saying as well
nicholas stern is saying you know with
hindsight which of course is a wonderful
thing
i might have done things differently
when it comes to care who's specifically
asking you
what would you have done differently i i
think the circumstances that have been
narrated by um all three of
the the colleagues that have spoken
i i can't really disagree with their
analysis
at the time that covered was coming
towards us
we realized and we thought the best
thing to do was to
ensure that older people who were being
um accommodated in hospitals where there
was no clinical need for them to be
there
we'd be better protected if they were in
care homes because
if there was an influx of covert cases
into hospitals
for vulnerable elderly people where the
danger of cross infection was very high
so the judgment was and if they if it
was safe to do so if the risk assessment
was undertaken
those individuals could be accommodated
either at home with support or in a care
home
and there's been constant political
pressure on us
to reduce delayed discharges in
hospitals to get
older people out of hospitals and into
care home situations
so we followed that approach but of
course we we have discovered
that just how brutal covert is
to all the members of our society and
our community
so but surely we knew we knew john john
sorry to interrupt but surely
we could see from the examples happening
in other countries quite how brutal
coronavirus was to the older generation
that evidence was already there yes but
my point is that we judge that the best
and safest way to support those
individuals was in a care home setting
or at home with support
rather than the hospital setting which
would be
the epicenter of handling chronovirus
cases
okay well let me just turn to layla for
it for a moment because because
hearing what alex massa was saying what
john's saying i mean there were other
countries
before us grappling with this and they
they
uh admitted people from hostels back
into care homes
but in in some cases in some countries
they put them into quarantine
special places or quarantined within
care homes is there anything we could
have learned from that
reasonably or is alex wright that
actually you know this was the best we
could have done in the circumstances
it's incredibly hard to say i look at
all what other countries have done and
as you see
there's been some sort of quarantine
centers or interim places to go
it's not exactly clear i mean obviously
what has happened
with coveted 19 in care homes has been
an absolute tragedy
but the reasons for that are not quite
as clear-cut as
sometimes people are assuming so we hear
people say oh it's because everyone
was sent out of hospital but actually
when you look at the data
it's not totally clear that that was
something
that um that has created this challenge
and in fact or you think it might have
spread in care homes anyway well that's
the thing i mean at the end of the day
this this we don't know when this first
started circulating
we we it looks as though the
when you started testing has a real
impact
on this looking at other countries and
care homes um
it looks like people going in and out of
care homes and potentially of course
playing its role and while we really
really want an answer to that
it's too early to figure out what's
going on but
we can see that we need an answer and we
need to learn and i i
guess that what i'd say is that this it
really exposes
the the under investments and the
undervaluing of social care
for successive governments and what what
we really need here
is a bit of a bit of a long-term plan
we've seen what's going on in social
care and it's really great that the
government is now
um you know giving some money towards
social care to say goodness
we need to bolster for example your
infection control mechanisms
our members have been telling us for
ages that while
hospitals are starting to get ppe in uh
care homes have been in a much worse
position for that there's a lot of
disparity here so there's no funding so
that care homes are able to get
better infection control processes in
place and things like that but that's a
short that's a short-term fix
and when we look at this we think
goodness the moment is here for social
care reform
and what are what are we going to do
about it what's the government going to
do about it
well i think the chronic underfunding of
social care across the united kingdom
and in scotland the chickens are now
coming home to roost and this is
obviously a problem under labour
it's been a problem for a long time and
what we need that some kind of political
consensus
to to fund social care we've been
talking about this now for too long but
let's
let's go through what we already knew we
knew that this
the prevalence of this disease was in
older people it was much more severe
in older people we knew from the 2014
report and task force for social care
that there was 34 recommendations very
few of them were implemented in scotland
we knew in 2015 that the government and
the scottish government had said they
would eradicate bed blocking it wasn't
done
but you from the silver swan report
there was a problem with ppe and a
problem with testing
if we had a global pandemic all of that
has since happened
and the decision was made by the
scottish government to move 912
elderly people from hospitals care homes
now that in itself is a big decision
and it's a decision i completely agree
with john these big decisions have to be
made
but the key thing here was that we're
taking from hospital
to care homes without testing so we're
essentially
exporting the disease on the people that
it affects the most
into care we have just had layla say
that we can't be sure that that was
the critical well deciding factor in
terms of that exponential growth
46 of all coronavirus deaths in scotland
have been in our care homes
this is the epicentre of chronovirus and
that's why because we sent people there
without testing
we sent people there without the lack of
ppe and the figures are if you
looked at them earlier scotland does
have one of the worst testing rates in
the world
and the biggest problem with that is
trying to get testing into
the social care sector we're only doing
between four and six thousand a day so
how can we possibly protect the
residents
and the staff and care homes without
fundamentally testing them regularly and
making sure that they are safe
helen let me just bring you back to to
reena's original question which is
was the policy a planned arrangement
putting
patients in care homes from hospitals
who hadn't been tested and does it
highlight the lack of value and respect
and respect we place on elderly citizens
so
every step of the way the government
followed scientific guidance on
what to do and clinical guidance and
well there was also hang on
there was also government guidance on
april the second the uk government
guidance
was negative tests are not required
for asymptomatic elderly patients prior
to transplants into care home and that
was government
but our government guidance was informed
by the science
and by the scientific guidance and but
what has happened over time is of course
that we have learnt
so for instance we've learned and the
world
has learned that actually you have a
situation with people who may
be asymptomatic carriers of the virus
and it's particularly hard we now know
with older people who don't display the
most common set of symptoms so there's a
particular reason which is why we're now
doing testing of all staff and all
residents
in care homes for older people those
with dementia exactly to do that to pick
up those who may be
asymptomatic as well as those who have
symptoms
because we're learning but i mean just
to go back and to pick up on on some of
the comments from the audience and some
i mean some really really uh
thoughtful comments but one thing i will
say is when i became the chemist on
the 14th of february and since then i
mean
so much of my time and so many people in
government has been on how we can
support
social care both care homes and home
care through
the pandemic and we know it's it's
really hard
one of the things that we saw um early
on was looking at spain
and the situation where the army went
into care homes where they'd been
abandoned and people had just been
left and and and left to die even from
neglect so
we've done we're put in place holds a
new reporting system so we know what's
going on in care home so we get a
picture of where there might be risks of
that
i should also say and i know this guy i
talk so much to care homes
that we should recognize that in england
over 60
of care homes have not had a covered
outbreak so actually lots of care homes
have managed to do an amazing job
in keeping covert out of their care
homes and many of those who've had it
now recovered from that outbreaks and
things are getting better
uh johnson you wanted to come in uh
after we were almost out of time so so
briefly i just want to let you have
another word i think the point the point
i wanted to make was that in
ian's last answer he talked about the
need for there to be
measures to tackle delayed discharges
and then when the government
tackles the issue of delayed discharge
we get criticized for it by ian murray
there are really difficult decisions
that have had to be taken here with the
best interests of the population at
heart
tough decisions in tough circumstances
okay and
many of the measures we've taken have
supported care homes to make sure
that individuals have had the resources
and the equipment
and and the the assistance in place to
make sure they were kept safe
in very difficult circumstances okay i'm
afraid you know i don't want to come
back in but our hour is up